KEP-5007: DRA Device Binding Conditions alpha in 1.35 (#5487)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/5007-device-attach-before-pod-scheduled/README.md

> 

Reviewer: Yeah. One of the main use cases for #4816 is to allow scaling of workloads and have those be successfully fulfilled even as resources in the cluster become constrained. For more context, see https://youtu.be/229AuQ52jUw?si=g25lowa_0mga5euD

For this in particular, imagine an inference workload that uses one GPU. You start scaling, and you run out of GPUs in your cluster and/or cloud provider quota. But demand is still increasing. What do you do? You can start failing, or you can switch to a slower, but still viable CPU inference. In fact, you may have tons of extra CPU sitting around on the machines that are already running your inference workloads, because they mostly use GPU.

To do this, you create your ResourceClaim with a prioritized list. The first choice is to satisfy the claim with a single GPU, and minimal CPU (say, .5). But if you can't do that, maybe you can give the claim 4 dedicated CPUs instead. If have machines with 64 CPUs and 8 GPUs, I can serve 8 Pods per node using GPUs. When I run out of GPUs, I start serving Pods with CPUs. That gives me (64 - 4 = 60) / 4 = 15 more Pods I can serve on each node in an emergency situation, with zero additional cost.

> 

Reviewer 2: I understand the use case. Thank you.
As a way to implement this use case, does extending the BindingConditions functionality to RC make the most sense?

I believe we need to implement at least the subrequest and priority functionality in RC.
However, I felt BindingConditions might not be necessary unless some preparation is required for the selected resource.
(I thought that if an available resource exists within the RS according to the subrequest priority, we could proceed to the Bind Phase at that point.)

On the other hand, is it more convenient to set BindingConditions on RC for gang scheduling?
In cases such as distributed training jobs where multiple Pods each need to use a GPU, delaying the binding until all Pods are ready can prevent partial job execution and wasted resources.
(Ensuring that the BindingConditions in the RC associated with each Pod are not satisfied until GPU availability is confirmed for all Pods that must run concurrently, thereby holding the schedule)

If device preparation fails — for example, due to fabric contention, hardware error, or controller-side timeout — the external controller (e.g., a composable DRA controller) should update the condition status in the `ResourceClaim`'s `allocationResult` to reflect the failure.
This is typically done by setting one or more `BindingFailureConditions` to `True`.
It should also ensure that the device is not picked again.
It can do that by removing the device from the ResourceSlice, adding a [device taint](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5055), or by changing the node selector, either at the ResourceSlice level or using per-device node selectors from the [partitionable devices](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4815).

> There is no guarantee that the scheduler will receive those updates in time for the next pod scheduling cycle, but eventually it will.

Author: Indeed, the idea of moving the SoT to the ResourceSlice seems ideal, as it would eliminate the need for rescheduling due to binding failure.
However, implementing this would require changes to the core of DRA, so I consider it a long-term solution.

In the scenario we’re considering—where devices require attachment—the device initially matched is not the same as the one actually allocated to the Pod.
(The initially allocated device appears as part of the ResourceSlice for the fabric device, but after attachment, it is visible as part of the ResourceSlice for the target node.)

Therefore, I'd like to discuss how the approach suggested by @dom4ha , where the allocation is preserved across scheduling cycles, solve the issue.
As @johnbelamaric proposed using DeviceTaint and CEL expressions, we need a way to explicitly identify the attached device instead of preserving the initially allocated device.

I thought that the taint-based approach is a good short-term solution and modifying the CEL expression at the time of writing the BindingFailure would be a good way to inform the scheduler which device should be allocated without the race. What do you think?

@johnbelamaric 
You mentioned the two parts of taint idea.
Is my understanding correct that you are aware of the potential race conditions in the order of "1" and "2", but by giving a) and b) to the ResourceClaim, you’re making it resilient to the race?

Also, you mentioned that adding a DeviceTaint to the ResourceSlice from an external controller would require the coordination with the vendor driver and the JSON file. But wouldn’t this be solvable using a DeviceTaintRule?
If we create a DeviceTaintRule before the device is attached, wouldn’t that ensure the published device is tainted?

> There is no guarantee that the scheduler will receive those updates in time for the next pod scheduling cycle, but eventually it will.

Reviewer: AIUI, there are (at least) two things we're working on with respect to this. All of this is non-blocking for 1.35 *alpha*, but we will need a solution in 1.36 to get to beta.

1. How to make it work on the happy path (no setting of binding failures and forcing rescheduling) in use cases where the resolution of the binding condition is contingent on provisioning/attaching some device.
2. How to manage re-scheduling when there is a binding failure.

I think 1) is a beta-blocker, I am not so sure on 2) but defer to the sig scheduling leads on that. Neither should prevent this KEP update from merging once it's fully revised to show remaining in alpha.

> If we create a DeviceTaintRule before the device is attached, wouldn’t that ensure the published device is tainted?

That's a good idea, but I am concerned there will be a race here still. We have no way to know if the scheduler will have seen that rule. I am also not sure how the taints would work against a device that does not yet exist. @pohly any insight here?

The JSON file works because the taint will exist immediately, the first time the device is published.

> There is no guarantee that the scheduler will receive those updates in time for the next pod scheduling cycle, but eventually it will.

Reviewer 3: A DeviceTaintRule may reference a non-existent device, it will be ignored until that device shows up.

But the "not seen by scheduler" part is a valid concern. The best that I could offer in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5512#discussion_r2432233027 for admin-created DeviceTaintRules was to delay setting the initial "nothing to do" condition long enough that it is unlikely that the scheduler is missing the taint and schedules a new pod.

I was thinking about a "taint was seen by scheduler" condition, but that is problematic:  We have potentially many schedulers. Do they all set their own condition? How does a user (or in this case DRA controller) know how many schedulers need to acknowledge?

I suspect we have to go for "eventually this will work": set a taint, wait a bit, then set the binding failure condition. It's unlikely to go wrong, and if it does we just try again.

> There is no guarantee that the scheduler will receive those updates in time for the next pod scheduling cycle, but eventually it will.

Author: @dom4ha 
> In the first option we risk that the resource released will be taken by other pods (either cpu/mem or other needed DRA resources). 

In our scenario, we assume that BindingFailure will not be written until the device is actually attached, so no separate scheduling cycle will run during that time.

>  We also need scoring to grab the attached resources. 

We plan to handle it by writing the specific device UUID directly into the ResourceClaim request using a CEL expression.

> IIUC this is the current proposal,

Yes, your understanding is correct.

We’ve been discussing the scheduler’s behavior after a BindingFailure is true, but since this feature will be alpha in v1.35, I’d like to treat this discussion as part of the preparation for its promotion to beta in v1.36.
I plan to create a new issue for the beta tasks in v1.36, where I’ll summarize the points discussed so far. Let’s continue the deep dive there.

**Scheduler does not guarantee to pick up the same node for the Pod after the reschedule (after binding failure)**

> Status: Addressed in this [KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5278)

Author: As mentioned in the previous comment, I believe feedback can also be achieved using taints.
In the case of a `retryable` error, we can apply a taint to the device and adjust the tolerations and CEL expressions in ResourceClaim to explicitly select it again.
In the case of a `permanent` error, simply applying the taint without the toleration would be sufficient to prevent rescheduling.

Basically scheduler should select the same node, however we need to consider the following scenarios:
 - In case of a failure, we might want to try a different node.

>  - During rescheduling, if another pod is deployed on that node and uses the resources, the rescheduled pod might not be able to be deployed. Therefore, we need logic to prioritize the rescheduled pod on that node.

Reviewer 4: Also there is no logic prioritizing the rescheduled pod or other way of preventing other pods from picking the newly attached device. The problem is that node nomination does not extend on DRA resources.

This is however something we should consider addressing even as part of our NNN promotion to beta, as it should solve a few other problems:
- Cluster Autoscaler can be informed about node resources nomination (for instance for pods waiting on gang scheduling gate), but it won't take into consideration DRA allocation and may recompute it differently
- In CPU & mem modeling problem in DRA, a kubelet could register not only to assigned pods, but also for pods nominated on that node. It could read the allocation from the RC and sync to it right after a pod got scheduled (nominated)

@x13n @wojtek-t @sanposhiho

This flow ensures that Pods are only bound when the associated device is confirmed to be usable.
![proposal](proposal.jpg)

#### Device Enhancements

To indicate that the device is a Fabric device or other device that requires some preparation (e.g. attachment), some fields are added to the `Device` within `ResourceSliceSpec`.
These fields will be used by the controller that exposes the `ResourceSlice` to notify whether the device is a fabric device.

```go
// Device represents one individual hardware instance that can be selected based
// on its attributes. Besides the name, exactly one field must be set.
type Device struct {
  ...
  // BindsToNode indicates if the usage of an allocation involving this device
  // has to be limited to exactly the node that was chosen when allocating the claim.
  // If set to true, the scheduler will set the ResourceClaim.Status.Allocation.NodeSelector
  // to match the node where the allocation was made.
  //
  // This is an alpha field and requires enabling the DRADeviceBindingConditions and DRAResourceClaimDeviceStatus
  // feature gates.
  //
  // +optional
  // +featureGate=DRADeviceBindingConditions,DRAResourceClaimDeviceStatus

>   BindsToNode *bool

Reviewer: non-node local devices in the ResourceSlice will have a binding condition to indicate "I can be used from any of this set of nodes, but you need to wait in pre-bind to let a controller do something, once you have picked the node". Normally, when a device is chosen by the scheduler, the node selector of the device is copied to the ResourceClaim status. This flag says "don't do that, instead, use the specific chosen node in the RC status".

So, in the RS, they would NOT have NodeName set, but in the RC status, they WOULD have it set.

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Resolve the following issues
  - If Scheduler picks up another node for the Pod after the restart, devices are unnecessarily left on the original nodes
    (Composable DRA controller needs to have the function to detach a device automatically if it is not used by a Pod for a certain period of time)
  - Pods which are not bound yet (in api-server) and not unschedulable (in api-server) are not visible by cluster autoscaler, so there is a risk that the node will be turned down

>   - The in-flight events cache may grow too large when waiting in PreBind

Author: We removed this point because this issue is expected to be resolved by using [Node nomination](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-priority-preemption/#user-exposed-information).

>   - The in-flight events cache may grow too large when waiting in PreBind

Reviewer 5: ```
  - Scheduler does not guarantee to pick up the same node for the Pod after the restart
  - If Scheduler picks up another node for the Pod after the restart, devices are unnecessarily left on the original nodes
    (Composable DRA controller needs to have the function to detach a device automatically if it is not used by a Pod for a certain period of time)
  - Pods which are not bound yet (in api-server) and not unschedulable (in api-server) are not visible by cluster autoscaler, so there is a risk that the node will be turned down
```

They are resolved by the latest NNN enhancement, Yes.

```
  - The in-flight events cache may grow too large when waiting in PreBind
```

But, I'm not sure about this one. I believe it should still happen: the in-flight events are cleared up after pods going through PreBind/WaitOnPermit.

>   - The in-flight events cache may grow too large when waiting in PreBind

Reviewer 5: Have we had a discussion for a potential solution for this in-flight event problem? I don't recall by myself.
I know @ttsuuubasa is a new owner and probably don't have a full context. But, @macsko @dom4ha do you remember something discussed before?

>   - The in-flight events cache may grow too large when waiting in PreBind

Reviewer 6: > But, I'm not sure about this one. I believe it should still happen: the in-flight events are cleared up after pods going through PreBind/WaitOnPermit.

We changed that in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/130189. Now, the in-flight events are cleared between WaitOnPermit and PreBind.

>   - The in-flight events cache may grow too large when waiting in PreBind

Reviewer 6: > They are resolved by the latest NNN enhancement

Assuming the NNN enhancement graduates to beta in v1.35

>   - The in-flight events cache may grow too large when waiting in PreBind

Reviewer 4: > - Scheduler does not guarantee to pick up the same node for the Pod after the restart

It would be fixed by NNN, but only if nomination extends to DRA allocation

> - The in-flight events cache may grow too large when waiting in PreBind

This one is fixed and could be removed from the list

  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

This feature exposes new fields such as `BindingConditions` in the

> `ResourceClaim` and `ResourceSlice`, the fields willeither be present or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ResourceClaim` and `ResourceSlice`, the fields will either be present or not.
```

> This feature uses the DRA interface and will follow the DRA upgrade/downgrade

Reviewer: There is no "DRA upgrade/downgrade". I would just say that the fields follow standard K8s feature flag semantics for managing field data and how components interact with those fields.

rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

When this feature is enabled, if a Pod requests a resource that has
BindingConditions, the Pod will wait in the PreBind phase until all
BindingConditions are set to True. This means that this feature only affects the
behavior before the Pod is scheduled, and does not affect running workloads.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->

> When a timeout occurs in BindingConditions, the Pod is repeatedly re-scheduled, which leads to an increase in the `scheduler_schedule_attempts_total` metric with the label `result=unschedulable`.

Reviewer: Can you add metrics measuring how many times a RC was scheduled with this feature, and how many times it timed out? If you see a whole bunch of timeouts, it probably means you screwed something up (like didn't deploy the controller).

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

<!--
Ideally, this should be a metric. Operations against the Kubernetes API (e.g.,
checking if there are objects with field X set) may be a last resort. Avoid
logs or events for this purpose.
-->

Operators can determine if this feature is in use by workloads by checking
the following:

> - Presence of elements in `ResourceClaim.status.allocation.devices.results.bindingConditions`.

Reviewer: Metrics are much much better. Imagine you have 50,000 clusters with thousands of resource claims each. How do you scrape every resource claim? It's hard.

Can we add a metric here?

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

We aim to ensure that the overhead introduced by the scheduler's waiting
mechanism in the PreBind phase is minimal. While the overhead mainly depends
on the responsiveness of external controllers (e.g., composable DRA controllers)
in updating ResourceClaim conditions, the scheduler's internal processing time
from detecting an updated ResourceClaim to completing the binding should be
consistently low.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

<!--
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->

This can be determined by comparing the time required for binding, specifically:

> The time from "BindingConditionsPending" to "Scheduled" in the Pod's event logs.

Reviewer: Can we get a metric here?

[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos
-->

Yes, when this feature is enabled and if devices corresponding to
BindingConditions exists in the k8s cluster, there is a potential impact on the
time it takes for a Pod to transition from creation to a Running state, as well
as on Pod creation throughput. This is due to waiting for status updates from

> external controllers in the scheduler's PreBind phase.

Reviewer: I wonder if we can annotate the metrics so people can still see the old version of the metric, excluding any requests that required binding. Can you look into that?
